[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome,
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
This is the second part of
our two-part program on aging,
change, and dying with Ram Dass,
author of "Be Here Now," "Grist
for the Mill," "How Can I
Help?," and "Still Here."
A pioneer in the
area of cultural
transformation, and has been
for many decades a forerunner.
In recent years, Ram Dass
has suffered a stroke, which
has been the subject of our
conversation, and as a result,
he experiences some aphasia
or slowness of speech.
So I invite you to listen to
this program and meditative
way, and if there
are pauses allow
yourself to enter
into the rhythm
and deepen your consciousness
in the conversation.
Welcome back, Ram Dass.
>> Thank you.
>> Pleasure to be with you.
In part 1, of this
two-part series,
we talked a bit
about how you had
the stroke and the
changes that occurred,
and we spoke of it in two ways.
Both-- it's a very powerful,
personal story, but in a way,
it epitomizes the aging and the
physical changes that we all
will face eventually, especially
people of my generation, Baby
Boomers, who are
really just entering
into the phase of aging.
right now.
And you were talking
about how it affects
your identity, your
sense of who you are,
and your memory of
who you've been.
>> Well, before the
stroke I played golf,
I played the cello, I drove my
sports cars with stick shift,
and this is sort of like--
>> That arm is pretty limp.
>> Yeah.
And I found that I'm
suffering more if I try to--
like if I remember myself
as a golfer or a cellist.
But if I like--
the stroke is a new incarnation.
>> Yeah.
>> And in this one,
I've never played golf.
And the comparison
of the past with the
now is cause for suffering.
>> It could be a
source of great pain.
>> Yeah.
And now I'm no longer a golfer,
I'm a person with stroke.
>> Yeah.
>> And the stroke, it opened
up whole new realms for me.
I learned quietness.
I learned respect for my body.
I learned-- see,
that's it, that like--
that quietness.
>> Because you were a teacher
of meditation for many years,
so this is a new
kind of quietness.
>> It's a forced
quietness by my brain.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And I'm just quiet--
the-- the time my brain
stops, then I get quiet.
>> Mm-hmm.
At one point you wrote that
there's-- it's as if there's a
room in your mind where
the concepts put on clothes
and the clothes are like words.
That room is no longer there.
>> It bombed out, but
you-- it's interesting,
because the concepts are
there, but there are no words
to clothe the concepts.
>> You're getting at I
think something crucial,
that it faces people
as they become older,
as they become decrepit--
maybe a sense of uselessness.
That the world seems to value
so much if you can be active,
if you can speak.
>> Yeah.
If you're young.
That's what-- it's not the
world, it's this culture.
>> Hmm.
>> Because like--
I was in a small village
that I visit in India,
and somebody said to me,
you're looking much older.
In this culture that
would be fighting words.
>> What do you mean?
>> Yeah, what do you-- yeah.
I should have gotten a suntan
or something like that.
But the way he said it, he
was like complimenting me.
Like, you're a wisdom carrier,
you are somebody we can trust.
>> An elder.
>> Yeah.
We don't have in our culture
the same respect for elders.
>> No, no.
No, no.
>> That's why I'm so grateful
to be able to be with you now
as you are on television because
it happens so rarely, I think.
>> Television has
very few elders.
>> I know.
>> And they have few in
advertising and few in the rest
of the programming.
>> Yeah.
>> And certainly very few
interviews with people who
experience aphasia.
>> Yes.
[LAUGHTER]
>> I had a funny experience.
I was-- the hospital I was--
one of the three hospitals,
they had a conference about me,
and they were kind
enough to let me sit in.
And they were discussing
me as if I were my brain.
>> Hmm.
Or the stroke.
>> As the stroke, yes.
And I said, excuse me,
but I'd like to point out
that I am not my brain.
My brain is a response mechanism
for adapting to this plane.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, I am--
I'm a consciousness,
and consciousness is not
localized in the brain.
And consciousness is heart and
not material manifestation.
>> Hmm.
>> They-- the doctors,
they treated me--
they treated that as--
that as psychosis.
>> Yes.
That's unfortunate.
I said that they was
the psychotic ones,
but you understand that--
>> I understand perfectly well.
Mainstream Western reality
is metaphysically ignorant.
>> Yeah, that's right.
Because they're
philosophical materialists.
>> Yeah.
But I have no question that
being with you now, I'm
in the presence
of a soul of being
much greater than this body.
>> Yes, yes.
>> And I know that's an
important part of your message.
>> Yeah.
Yes.
And you can see it
because you are it.
I mean, just like--
we can see a soul in another
person because we have--
a soul can see a soul.
>> Yeah.
It's a resonance.
I feel like a bubbliness, an
incredible fizzy feeling just
being in your presence.
>> A fizzy feeling?
>> A fizzy feeling.
Really
[LAUGHTER]
>> OK.
>> I don't know, it's
energizing around us.
You are a great
soul, I have to say,
and an incredible inspiration to
me and have been for decades--
not just to me, but to
millions of the people
who I value most,
people who have
who have lived with me through
some incredible periods--
protest movements, a
psychedelic revolution,
a consciousness explosion.
You've been out there
leading the way,
and I see this
experience as you're
out there still is
the pioneer, saying
this is the next territory
we're going to conquer.
>> Yeah.
Because this is a new
and frightening territory
for most people.
>> Yeah.
Ram Dass, we'll take a break.
>> We'll be back.
Welcome back to
"Fizzing Allowed."
[LAUGHTER]
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
I'm talking with Ram Dass.
We're exploring aging,
change, and dying.
And let's talk about dying.
>> OK.
>> You have sat at the
deathbed of hundreds,
maybe thousands of people.
>> Yeah.
>> I remember reading in your
book "Still Here," you said,
you regretted it, it took you
until the age of 29 before you
actually witnessed a death.
But I can attest--
and I'm very interested in
death and dying, and I'm 53
and I have yet to be in
the presence of death.
>> Being present at death and
being present at birth are--
they're-- they're
change experiences.
>> Yeah.
>> That's where you come
to the mystery right there.
>> Yeah.
Well, I attended one
birth in my life, but--
>> Yours?
>> No, no.
I mean one other.
[LAUGHS] One other
birth, a young man
who I am his godfather.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> But now let's focus on
death, on death's some more.
It's the ultimate mystery
that we all have to confront.
And I suppose for
many people, it's
not death itself
that's so frightening,
but the process that
leads up to death.
The stroke may be
an example of that.
>> Mm-hmm.
So much frightening like pain.
>> Yeah.
>> Pain.
And uncertainty.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And change that goes along
with the change in death.
People bring their
fears about death--
there are three
fears that I know.
The before death
and then the death
moment and what
comes after death.
And the first one is
they're afraid of pain
and the uncertainty.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And that's the one that's--
that's the-- the ego has--
the ego has-- ultimate loss--
the--
>> It must be very embarrassing
to the ego to be going through
that.
>> Yeah.
Yes.
And-- but the soul doesn't
have anything to do with death.
He is-- the soul looks
like saying, he's dying.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Never I'm dying.
And it's very-- to go into the
death process with your soul,
identifying with your soul.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> They become the onlooker.
Just like I was the
onlooker for the stroke.
>> During the stroke, yeah.
Well you talk about, if I
understand it correctly,
pure awareness.
You write about it
with a capital A--
>> Yeah.
>> --as being even a
deeper level than the soul.
>> Yes.
If we try to find we
have so many I's--
and I do this, I, I,
the I of the ego--
I'm in television.
I'm I. Then we have
the I of the soul.
As the soul split off from
God, to just take a moment
to take an incarnation.
And because the incarnation
lessons to learn.
And the soul has
only one motive,
and that motive is
melding with the beloved,
melding with the one.
The soul was split off--
split off from the one, and
that's all they want to get.
It's like Rumi.
Love like that.
And the soul gets incarnations--
a step with-- a step
up towards the one.
Then besides those
two, ego and soul,
we have the Atman,
which is the god in us.
And it's interesting,
that's an abstraction,
but we experience it--
we feel it as awareness.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Like I am aware of what
comes in through my ears.
I come aware of different
parts of my body.
>> Sensory motor system.
>> Yeah.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Now-- but that awareness,
when you try to-- you
can't objectify, that--
that is always subjective.
And you can never study
the awareness inside.
It's like--
[LAUGHTER]
>> But that movement,
that movement,
it makes me think of what
you said of the soul wanting
to return.
And as you were speaking,
I had this strong sense
it doesn't want to just
return, because that's where it
came from in the first place.
It's as if it wants to reach
and touch and feel and love
and bring all of
that back with it.
>> Yeah, it wants that-- ahh.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Well, that's the--
it's like-- it's like
the orgasm with God.
>> Yeah.
And that-- you can--
you can feel it
before it happens.
That's-- well, that's
the word ecstasy.
>> Hmm.
>> It's not-- it's not a thing.
It is-- it's-- oh God.
[LAUGHTER]
>> This would be difficult
under the best of circumstances
to describe, but we're talking
about the moment of death,
and I think there is a sense
in which the fulfillment
of one's life at death
could be like that.
>> It's just that.
I think the best description
of the moment of death
is LSD session.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Because you've
got no control,
you've got wide open space.
What you were before
is nothing like--
nothing like--
>> Who you are at that--
>> Who-- who's-- yeah.
And the moment is just change--
it's like change.
>> Yeah.
Anybody that would like change,
there is a serious change.
There is serious change.
And death, because-- it's--
>> It may never get
quite to the bottom of it
because we're
running out of time.
>> OK, OK.
>> We'll leave the
mystery of death for--
>> Come back next time.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Ram Dass, what a
joy to be with you.
What a grace, what an awesome
experience, thank you so much.
>> Thank you.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]